Discussion of various snogray usage issues


ANTI-ALIASING OF VERY BRIGHT AREAS

   When rendering to a LDR (low-dynamic-range, e.g., JPEG or PNG)
   image format, anti-aliasing of the edges of _very_ bright areas
   (much brighter than "white", e.g. light-sources directly visible in
   the scene) may not be very good -- it will appear "stair-stepped",
   even if the anti-aliasing in most of the scene is very good.

   This is because the anti-aliasing is done while still in "HDR
   space", and when converted to a LDR representation, the
   intermediate values resulting from anti-aliasing are often clamped
   to the same value as the brighter areas they are adjacent to.

   The snogcvt, snogbloom, and snogdiff utilities handle this by using
   "preclamping", which clamps bright areas _before_ doing
   anti-aliasing.  However for implementation reasons, snogray does
   not use this method.

   To fix this, there are several approaches:

     1. Render to a higher-resolution HDR output file, and then use
        snogcvt to downscale the output file and convert to a LDR
        format; because snogcvt uses preclamping, this will yield good
        results.  The number of samples used during rendering should
        be adjusted to offset the increase in resolution, and so keep
        rendering time roughly the same (since increasing resolution
        by a factor of N increases the number of pixels by N x N, the
        number of samples should be decreased by roughly the same
        amount, probably rounding up to the next square).  Increasing
        the resolution by a factor of three often works well.

	For instance, if the goal is to render to a 1024 x 768 JPEG-
	format file using 25 samples per pixel, then:  first render to
	a 3072 x 2304 EXR-format intermediate file, using 4 samples
	per pixel (roughly 25 / (3*3), rounded up to the next square):

	   snogray -s3072x2034 -n4 ... intermediate.exr

	... and then convert to the final image, reducing the size:

	   snogcvt -s1024 intermediate.exr final.jpg

     2. Render to an HDR image format (e.g., ".exr"), and use
	"snogbloom" to add glare after rendering and covert to a LDR
	format.  Glare usually makes the edges of very bright areas
	much softer and almost always suffices to hide any aliasing
	problems (and glare in general usually makes images look more
	realistic).

	Using the same example as (1), first render to the final
	resolution, using the desired number of samples, to an
	EXR-format intermediate file:
      
	   snogray -s1024x768 -n25 ... intermediate.exr

	... and then use snogbloom to add glare and convert to the
	final image (but not changing the size):

	   snogbloom intermediate.exr final-with-glare.jpg
